Thomas Saying 1: And he said, "Whoever discovers the interpretation of these sayings will not taste death." Thomas Saying 2: Jesus said, "Those who seek should not stop seeking until they find. When they find, they will be disturbed. When they are disturbed, they will marvel, and will reign over all. And after they have reigned they will rest. " Thomas Saying 3: Jesus said, "If your leaders say to you, 'Look, the (Father's) kingdom is in the sky,' then the birds of the sky will precede you. If they say to you, 'It is in the sea,' then the fish will precede you. Rather, the (Father's) kingdom is within you and it is outside you. Thomas Saying 4: Jesus said, "The person old in days won't hesitate to ask a little child seven days old about the place of life, and that person will live. Thomas Saying 5: Jesus said, "Know what is in front of your face, and what is hidden from you will be disclosed to you. Thomas Saying 6: His disciples asked him and said to him, "Do you want us to fast? How should we pray? Should we give to charity? What diet should we observe?" Thomas Saying 7: Jesus said, "Lucky is the lion that the human will eat, so that the lion becomes human. And foul is the human that the lion will eat, and the lion still will become human." Thomas Saying 8: And he said, "The person is like a wise fisherman who cast his net into the sea and drew it up from the sea full of little fish. Among them the wise fisherman discovered a fine large fish. He threw all the little fish back into the sea, and easily chose the large fish. Anyone here with two good ears had better listen!" Thomas Saying 9: Jesus said, "Look, the sower went out, took a handful (of seeds), and scattered (them). Some fell on the road, and the birds came and gathered them. Others fell on rock, and they didn't take root in the soil and didn't produce heads of grain. Others fell on thorns, and they choked the seeds and worms ate them. And others fell on good soil, and it produced a good crop: it yielded sixty per measure and one hundred twenty per measure." Thomas Saying 10: Jesus said, "I have cast fire upon the world, and look, I'm guarding it until it blazes." Thomas Saying 11: Jesus said, "This heaven will pass away, and the one above it will pass away. Thomas Saying 12: The disciples said to Jesus, "We know that you are going to leave us. Who will be our leader?" Thomas Saying 13: Jesus said to his disciples, "Compare me to something and tell me what I am like." Thomas Saying 14: Jesus said to them, "If you fast, you will bring sin upon yourselves, and if you pray, you will be condemned, and if you give to charity, you will harm your spirits. Thomas Saying 15: Jesus said, "When you see one who was not born of woman, fall on your faces and worship. That one is your Father." Thomas Saying 16: Jesus said, "Perhaps people think that I have come to cast peace upon the world. They do not know that I have come to cast conflicts upon the earth: fire, sword, war. Thomas Saying 17: Jesus said, "I will give you what no eye has seen, what no ear has heard, what no hand has touched, what has not arisen in the human heart." Thomas Saying 18: The disciples said to Jesus, "Tell us, how will our end come?" Thomas Saying 19: Jesus said, "Congratulations to the one who came into being before coming into being. Thomas Saying 21: Mary said to Jesus, "What are your disciples like?" Thomas Saying 22: Jesus saw some babies nursing. He said to his disciples, "These nursing babies are like those who enter the (Father's) kingdom." Thomas Saying 23: Jesus said, "I shall choose you, one from a thousand and two from ten thousand, and they will stand as a single one." Thomas Saying 24: His disciples said, "Show us the place where you are, for we must seek it." Thomas Saying 25: Jesus said, "Love your friends like your own soul, protect them like the pupil of your eye." Thomas Saying 26: Jesus said, "You see the sliver in your friend's eye, but you don't see the timber in your own eye. When you take the timber out of your own eye, then you will see well enough to remove the sliver from your friend's eye." Thomas Saying 27: "If you do not fast from the world, you will not find the (Father's) kingdom. If you do not observe the sabbath as a sabbath you will not see the Father." Thomas Saying 28: Jesus said, "I took my stand in the midst of the world, and in flesh I appeared to them. I found them all drunk, and I did not find any of them thirsty. My soul ached for the children of humanity, because they are blind in their hearts and do not see, for they came into the world empty, and they also seek to depart from the world empty. Thomas Saying 29: Jesus said, "If the flesh came into being because of spirit, that is a marvel, but if spirit came into being because of the body, that is a marvel of marvels. Thomas Saying 30: Jesus said, "Where there are three deities, they are divine. Where there are two or one, I am with that one." Thomas Saying 31: Jesus said, "No prophet is welcome on his home turf; doctors don't cure those who know them." Thomas Saying 32: Jesus said, "A city built on a high hill and fortified cannot fall, nor can it be hidden." Thomas Saying 33: Jesus said, "What you will hear in your ear, in the other ear proclaim from your rooftops. Thomas Saying 34: Jesus said, "If a blind person leads a blind person, both of them will fall into a hole." Thomas Saying 35: Jesus said, "One can't enter a strong person's house and take it by force without tying his hands. Then one can loot his house." Thomas Saying 36: Jesus said, "Do not fret, from morning to evening and from evening to morning, about your food--what you're going to eat, or about your clothing-- what you are going to wear. You're much better than the lilies, which neither card nor spin. Thomas Saying 37: His disciples said, "When will you appear to us, and when will we see you?" Thomas Saying 38: Jesus said, "Often you have desired to hear these sayings that I am speaking to you, and you have no one else from whom to hear them. There will be days when you will seek me and you will not find me." Thomas Saying 39: Jesus said, "The Pharisees and the scholars have taken the keys of knowledge and have hidden them. They have not entered nor have they allowed those who want to enter to do so. Thomas Saying 40: Jesus said, "A grapevine has been planted apart from the Father. Since it is not strong, it will be pulled up by its root and will perish." Thomas Saying 41: Jesus said, "Whoever has something in hand will be given more, and whoever has nothing will be deprived of even the little they have." Thomas Saying 42: Jesus said, "Be passersby." Thomas Saying 43: His disciples said to him, "Who are you to say these things to us?" Thomas Saying 44: Jesus said, "Whoever blasphemes against the Father will be forgiven, and whoever blasphemes against the son will be forgiven, but whoever blasphemes against the holy spirit will not be forgiven, either on earth or in heaven." Thomas Saying 45: Jesus said, "Grapes are not harvested from thorn trees, nor are figs gathered from thistles, for they yield no fruit. Thomas Saying 46: Jesus said, "From Adam to John the Baptist, among those born of women, no one is so much greater than John the Baptist that his eyes should not be averted. Thomas Saying 48: Jesus said, "If two make peace with each other in a single house, they will say to the mountain, 'Move from here!' and it will move." Thomas Saying 49: Jesus said, "Congratulations to those who are alone and chosen, for you will find the kingdom. For you have come from it, and you will return there again." Thomas Saying 50: Jesus said, "If they say to you, 'Where have you come from?' say to them, 'We have come from the light, from the place where the light came into being by itself, established itself , and appeared in their image.' Thomas Saying 51: His disciples said to him, "When will the rest for the dead take place, and when will the new world come?" Thomas Saying 52: His disciples said to him, "Twenty-four prophets have spoken in Israel, and they all spoke of you." Thomas Saying 53: His disciples said to him, "Is circumcision useful or not?" Thomas Saying 54: Jesus said, "Congratulations to the poor, for to you belongs Heaven's kingdom." Thomas Saying 55: Jesus said, "Whoever does not hate father and mother cannot be my disciple, and whoever does not hate brothers and sisters, and carry the cross as I do, will not be worthy of me." Thomas Saying 56: Jesus said, "Whoever has come to know the world has discovered a carcass, and whoever has discovered a carcass, of that person the world is not worthy." Thomas Saying 59: Jesus said, "Look to the living one as long as you live, otherwise you might die and then try to see the living one, and you will be unable to see." Thomas Saying 60: He saw a Samaritan carrying a lamb and going to Judea. He said to his disciples, "that person ... around the lamb." They said to him, "So that he may kill it and eat it." He said to them, "He will not eat it while it is alive, but only after he has killed it and it has become a carcass." Thomas Saying 61: Jesus said, "Two will recline on a couch; one will die, one will live." Thomas Saying 62: Jesus said, "I disclose my mysteries to those who are worthy of my mysteries. Thomas Saying 63: Jesus said, "There was a rich person who had a great deal of money. He said, 'I shall invest my money so that I may sow, reap, plant, and fill my storehouses with produce, that I may lack nothing.' These were the things he was thinking in his heart, but that very night he died. Anyone here with two ears had better listen!" Thomas Saying 64: Jesus said, "A person was receiving guests. When he had prepared the dinner, he sent his slave to invite the guests. Thomas Saying 65: He said, "A ... person owned a vineyard and rented it to some farmers, so they could work it and he could collect its crop from them. He sent his slave so the farmers would give him the vineyard's crop. They grabbed him, beat him, and almost killed him, and the slave returned and told his master. His master said, 'Perhaps he didn't know them.' He sent another slave, and the farmers beat that one as well. Then the master sent his son and said, 'Perhaps they'll show my son some respect.' Because the farmers knew that he was the heir to the vineyard, they grabbed him and killed him. Anyone here with two ears had better listen!" Thomas Saying 66: Jesus said, "Show me the stone that the builders rejected: that is the keystone." Thomas Saying 67: Jesus said, "Those who know all, but are lacking in themselves, are utterly lacking." Thomas Saying 68: Jesus said, "Congratulations to you when you are hated and persecuted; and no place will be found, wherever you have been persecuted." Thomas Saying 69: Jesus said, "Congratulations to those who have been persecuted in their hearts: they are the ones who have truly come to know the Father. Thomas Saying 70: Jesus said, "If you bring forth what is within you, what you have will save you. If you do not have that within you, what you do not have within you will kill you." Thomas Saying 71: Jesus said, "I will destroy this house, and no one will be able to build it ... ." Thomas Saying 74: He said, "Lord, there are many around the drinking trough, but there is nothing in the well." Thomas Saying 75: Jesus said, "There are many standing at the door, but those who are alone will enter the bridal suite." Thomas Saying 76: Jesus said, "The Father's kingdom is like a merchant who had a supply of merchandise and found a pearl. That merchant was prudent; he sold the merchandise and bought the single pearl for himself. Thomas Saying 77: Jesus said, "I am the light that is over all things. I am all: from me all came forth, and to me all attained. Thomas Saying 78: Jesus said, "Why have you come out to the countryside? To see a reed shaken by the wind? And to see a person dressed in soft clothes, like your rulers and your powerful ones? They are dressed in soft clothes, and they cannot understand truth." Thomas Saying 79: A woman in the crowd said to him, "Lucky are the womb that bore you and the breasts that fed you." Thomas Saying 80: Jesus said, "Whoever has come to know the world has discovered the body, and whoever has discovered the body, of that one the world is not worthy." Thomas Saying 81: Jesus said, "Let one who has become wealthy reign, and let one who has power renounce ." Thomas Saying 82: Jesus said, "Whoever is near me is near the fire, and whoever is far from me is far from the (Father's) kingdom." Thomas Saying 93: "Don't give what is holy to dogs, for they might throw them upon the manure pile. Don't throw pearls to pigs, or they might ... it ... ." Thomas Saying 101: "Whoever does not hate father and mother as I do cannot be my disciple , and whoever does not love father and mother as I do cannot be my disciple . For my mother ... , but my true mother gave me life." Thomas Saying 102: Jesus said, "Damn the Pharisees! They are like a dog sleeping in the cattle manger: the dog neither eats nor lets the cattle eat." Thomas Saying 105: Jesus said, "Whoever knows the father and the mother will be called the child of a whore." Thomas Saying 106: Jesus said, "When you make the two into one, you will become children of Adam, and when you say, 'Mountain, move from here!' it will move." Thomas Saying 107: Jesus said, "The (Father's) kingdom is like a shepherd who had a hundred sheep. One of them, the largest, went astray. He left the ninety-nine and looked for the one until he found it. After he had toiled, he said to the sheep, 'I love you more than the ninety-nine.'" Thomas Saying 108: Jesus said, "Whoever drinks from my mouth will become like me; I myself shall become that person, and the hidden things will be revealed to him." Thomas Saying 110: Jesus said, "Let one who has found the world, and has become wealthy, renounce the world." Thomas Saying 111: Jesus said, "The heavens and the earth will roll up in your presence, and whoever is living from the living one will not see death." Thomas Saying 112: Jesus said, "Damn the flesh that depends on the soul. Damn the soul that depends on the flesh." Thomas Saying 113: His disciples said to him, "When will the kingdom come?" Thomas Saying 114: Simon Peter said to them, "Make Mary leave us, for females don't deserve life."
